Lecture 2: Theoretical Underpinnings of Ethics

This week’s lecture covered the topic of ‘Theoretical Underpinnings of Ethics’. Ethics is essentially the exploration of ethical reasoning, which involves creating reasoned arguments for moral claims about what we should do, or what is/ought to be done, morally speaking. These reasoned arguments are essentially reasons for accepting claims; we often structure these as premises for accepting conclusions. To decide on which actions to take, the main forms of ethics are rule-based ethics (deontological), consequentialist ethics and virtue ethics (defining virtuous behaviour as a function of one’s character). The stamp of ethical thinking is that “ethics costs”. This is because we must account for the interests of others, but in deciding whose interests we necessarily care about, we must consider ethical relativism which is the claim that the truth of ethical judgements is relative to context and/or culture. 

There are two distinct branches of relativism – descriptive and normative. Descriptive relativism is the notion that people actually hold radically different moral values and these have changed over time. This is linked to descriptive ethics which investigates what people do, and what they think are the right things to do – describing their moral outlook. Normative relativism is the notion that different views are all equally true, and thus we shouldn’t judge. 
However, this is distinct from prescriptive/normative ethics which is the task of deciding what the right thing is to do, morally speaking. This way of thinking enables a structured top-down approach to ethical reasoning where a judgement can be made about a specific dilemma, through a rationale (reasoning through application of some principles), which is then generalisable (an appeal to a certain principle/principles). This allows for a concrete assessment based on more generalised, abstract principles. 

In deciding which moral principles are correct, there exists several trains of thought: teleology (consequentialism), deontology (rule-based), and virtue ethics. J.S. Mill and Peter Singer are renowned consequentialists falling under the umbrella of utilitarianists, whereas Immanuel Kant was a proponent of non-consequential thinking, founding what we now call “Kantian Ethics”. This form of ethics defines an action as moral if it is done for the sake of duty/role (for example promise-keeping), agents are responsible for their own actions, and there exists perfect and imperfect duties. It relies on a set of categorical imperatives or ‘maxims’ each of which are derived logically from the ones before it; the first formulation of which forms the basis of all others.

On the other hand, J.S. Mill and W.D. Ross are both proponents of utilitarianism which defines moral actions as those which tend to promote happiness. This is a form of consequentialism as it rests on the idea that the consequences or results of actions (specifically the utility or happiness they provide) determine whether those actions are good or bad, right or wrong.

 Finally, virtue ethics regards the cultivation of desirable character traits such as honesty to act morally. In essence, the cultivation of virtues (internal) will allow one to act morally towards others (interpersonal). This idea was presented by Plato and furthered by Aristotle who made the distinction between “moral virtues” and “intellectual virtues” – acting morally versus thinking morally. Aristotle suggested that the ultimate “goal” of acting and thinking morally was to arrive at happiness. Virtue ethics is distinct from deontological/teleological thought as it relates to the cultivation of one’s character, as opposed to what actions one should perform. These constitute “private/individual morality” which concerns only us as individuals, which is further separated from “public/role morality”, which concerns us as public role players (for example a doctor, lawyer, or the CEO of a company).

To reconcile these seemingly disparate moral theories, the notion of pluralism suggests that there is no one single moral theory or principle that is preferential to others. This links back to normative relativism as it recognises that there are different and diverse ethical positions across different cultures, times, places, and individuals that should be recognised; there is not necessarily one single correct principle. 


