Huawei is a multinational technology corporation headquartered in Shenzhen, China. Initially a manufacturer of phone switches, they now specialise in the design and development of telecommunications equipment, as well as consumer electronics such as smartphones. They have grown substantially in the past 10 years and are ranked as the second-largest R&D investor in the world, fifth in US patents, deploying their products and services in over 170 different countries and areas. In 2018, Huawei overtook Apple as the second-largest manufacturer of smartphones in the world behind Samsung, and in 2020 Huawei surpassed Samsung and Apple in the number of phones shipped worldwide. 

The company’s exceptional growth is largely due to its links with the Chinese government, who have provided them with $75 billion in tax breaks, financing, and cheap resources, enabling them to sell their products at extremely low prices, bankrupting their competitors.  This was alarming to technology companies in the US and Europe since they were competing against both a technology company and a nation. 

Telecommunication companies like Verizon and T-Mobile were happy to buy such cheap equipment from Huawei and as a result most of the world – Africa, Latin America, Eastern Europe, and Asia – is dominated by Huawei equipment, with the notable exception of the US and Western Europe. Huawei has faced difficulties in these markets due to the lack of state support stemming from cybersecurity concerns, primarily from the US government, that Huawei’s infrastructure equipment may enable surveillance by the Chinese government. A recent parliamentary enquiry in the UK concluded there was “clear evidence of collusion” between Huawei and the CCP “apparatus”.  These findings, and various others, indicate Huawei’s role as a means of extending China’s surveillance and suppression around the world.

Huawei has faced various sanctions and restrictions from Western governments due to suspicions concerning Huawei’s data collection and monitoring policies. In September 2020, the US dealt a major blow to Huawei’s core smartphone business by cutting off Huawei’s chip supplies which resulted in a US$30 billion annual loss with revenues down 29%.  The US has placed a trade ban on Huawei, stopping companies such as Google and Qualcomm from dealing with it – meaning Huawei phones can no longer run Android.  Despite these sanctions, China has been able to gain power in the US by putting Huawei cellular gear in small rural areas which overlook nearly every nuclear missile and special operations base.  








Ethical Discussion

Huawei’s affiliation with the Chinese government, raise important ethical concerns around Huawei providing a means for the Chinese government to conduct surveillance and espionage in foreign countries, posing a severe cyber-security threat, and the ethics of being government-funded and violating the basic principles of free market competition, overpowering competition in the telecommunications equipment industry.

The main stakeholders involved in the first issue are individual consumers who are the end-users of Huawei equipment, governments on all sides (both Chinese and foreign), and Huawei itself. Huawei has long been suspected of assisting Chinese surveillance programs, and although they deny these claims, a recent discovery made by The Washington Post revealed over 100 leaked PowerPoint presentations which “strongly suggest Huawei’s participation in China’s surveillance programs”, indicating a suite of surveillance tools including voice recording analysis (using AI technology), prison monitoring, location tracking, facial recognition, Xinjiang surveillance (a region with a significant Uyghur Muslim population), and corporate monitoring. 

The second ethical issue includes other telecommunication production companies, such as Finland’s Nokia and Sweden’s Ericsson, as key stakeholders.  Huawei’s access to one of the world’s cheapest labour forces and its government subsidies means it is always going to be cheaper than Scandinavian or American technology, removing the possibility for fair market competition.

Deontological perspective:

For IT companies, there are existing codes which are agreed upon by the profession, such as the ACS Code of Ethics, which help us to identify potential ethical issues and how to resolve them. Huawei violates two key points of the ACS Code of Ethics.  
1. “The Primacy of the Public Interest: You will place the interests of the public above those of personal, business, or sectional interests”. Huawei clearly violates this point by placing the interests of their business above public interest, in that they continue to conduct surveillance to serve their own company (as they continue to be government-funded), and the Chinese government itself, disregarding the interests of the public by violating their fundamental right to privacy and anonymity that is to be expected from telecommunication providers. 
3. “Honesty: You will be honest in your representation of skills, knowledge, services, and products.” Huawei continues to deny participation in China’s surveillance programs despite various discoveries indicating otherwise and are thus being dishonest about the data-collection capabilities of their products and services. Reporting from Wired suggesting that the Chinese “government doesn't limit itself to what the law explicitly allows” when it comes to national security. “All Chinese citizens and organisations are obliged to cooperate upon request with PRC intelligence operations—and also maintain the secrecy of such operations”, as stated in Article 7 of the 2017 PRC national intelligence-gathering activities law.  

Although denying these claims, by not cooperating with foreign intelligence services requesting backdoors into their products, Huawei will be unable to cleanse its reputation. The only obvious course of action here would be for Huawei to cooperate with foreign governments in allowing backdoors into their equipment, simultaneously eliminating foreign governments’ suspicion of espionage, and giving foreign users peace of mind when using Huawei products. This raises the question as to whether all technology companies should grant backdoor access to their products – however a more balanced approach would require this only from technology companies for whom there is evidence of wrongdoing. 
From a Kantian perspective, Huawei’s activities violate the first two formulations of the categorical imperative, in that they are conducting surveillance of the public despite not wishing that same activity be applied to them, and they are treating humanity as a means rather than an end through using public surveillance to provide the Chinese government with intelligence. It is highly unlikely that the figures in power at Huawei want their private conversations and activities monitored, and yet they provide the CCP with extraordinary surveillance capabilities both at home and abroad. This is characteristic of authoritative governments seeking to maintain power at all costs – even to the detriment of their own citizens. 
It is also important to consider the duties of various parties involved. The surveillance and use of data without the consent of the user violates a fundamental right to privacy and anonymity expected from telecommunication providers. Huawei has a duty to not use and transmit sensitive data back to the Chinese government for political gain and is obligated to be open and transparent about its use of confidential data. Governments are obligated to protect their citizens’ confidential information and online security – justifying the sanctions placed on Huawei by the US and Europe. Telecommunication companies in countries outside of China have a duty to not use equipment that poses a risk to both to the governments and users within that country, even when there is strong financial incentive for such companies to use competitively priced Huawei equipment. 
Consequentialist perspective:

From a position of ethical egoism, it is obviously attractive for Huawei to continue to receive financial support from the Chinese government as this provides long-term security for the company. However, a more utilitarian perspective is needed to consider all parties involved. 

If Huawei doesn’t conform to the requirements of being completely transparent about its surveillance tactics, then users’ data and privacy is being wrongfully violated which could result in personal or professional distress caused by data leaks or breaches. Furthermore, the Chinese government may gain unfair and unlawful intelligence relating to military operations or otherwise which is harmful to foreign governments. Some actions to consider include owning up to past geo-political strategies used by Huawei and providing access to the US government to company data logs to eliminate reason for concern, should they wish to operate in the US. The US, on the other hand, wouldn’t need to reciprocate since there hasn’t been suspicion or evidence of espionage-related activity from US companies. 

Furthermore, if Huawei continues to be government-funded this creates unfair competition for other telecommunication equipment and smartphone providers since strong financial backing enables far-superior R&D and extremely competitive pricing. Additionally, the natural separation between “government” and “private-sector” is blurred. By reducing natural market competition, this could potentially create a monopoly over the telecommunications industry and leads to ambiguity around Huawei’s role as a means of extending Chinese suppression and power into foreign countries. Some actions to consider include reducing government subsidisation and separating Huawei from the Chinese government managerially. 

A utilitarian analysis of these potential actions reveals that, despite the financial risk of reduced government subsidies, Huawei would benefit by tapping into Western markets, expanding its business in an ethical, unambiguous way. Tensions between Western countries and China will ease, and Huawei will be unfettered by restrictions and sanctions. On the downside, telecommunication companies would face increased cost of equipment (resulting from reduced government subsidies), meaning higher prices for users. 

Bibliography:
  Huawei - Wikipedia. (2022). Retrieved 12 April 2022, from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Huawei#History

  Yap, C. (2022). State Support Helped Fuel Huawei’s Global Rise. Retrieved 10 April 2022, from https://www.wsj.com/articles/state-support-helped-fuel-huaweis-global-rise-11577280736
 
  Huawei: MPs claim 'clear evidence of collusion' with Chinese Communist Party. (2022). Retrieved 15 April 2022, from https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-54455112

  Sanction-hit Huawei says revenues down 29% this year. (2022). Retrieved 12 April 2022, from https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2021/dec/31/sanction-hit-huawei-says-revenues-down-29-this-year

  Keane, S. (2022). Huawei ban timeline: Detained CFO makes deal with US Justice Department. Retrieved 19 April 2022, from https://www.cnet.com/news/privacy/huawei-ban-timeline-detained-cfo-makes-deal-with-us-justice-department/

  Conte, A. (2022). Huawei connects rural America. Could it threaten the country's most sensitive military sites?. Retrieved 19 April 2022, from https://edition.cnn.com/2019/03/11/politics/huawei-cell-towers-missile-silos/index.html

  Dou, E. (2022). Documents link Huawei to China’s surveillance programs. Retrieved 17 April 2022, from https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2021/12/14/huawei-surveillance-china/

  ACS Code of Professional Conduct (2022). Retrieved 16 April 2022, from https://www.acs.org.au/content/dam/acs/rules-and-regulations/Code-of-Professional-Conduct_v2.1.pdf

  Nast, C. (2022). US Lawyers Don’t Buy Huawei’s Argument on Chinese Hacking. Retrieved 19 April 2022, from https://www.wired.com/story/us-lawyers-dont-buy-huaweis-argument-chinese-hacking/

Donahue, Thomas. “The Worst Possible Day: U.S. Telecommunications and Huawei.” PRISM, vol. 8, no. 3, 2019, pp. 14–35, https://www.jstor.org/stable/26864274. Accessed 10 Apr. 2022.

Handling the Huawei threat safely means ditching 'free market' foolishness. (2022). Retrieved 19 April 2022, from https://nypost.com/2020/02/14/handling-the-huawei-threat-safely-means-ditching-free-market-foolishness/


